Platypuses are venomous. They might look cute and cuddly, but come across a male platypus in mating season and you’ll be in for a painful shock. Male platypuses have a hollow spur on each hind leg connected to a venom secreting gland, and while their venom is lethal, there are no recorded deaths from platypuses or from platypus stings.
They give sharks a run for their money – at least as far as electroreception is concerned. Like a shark, the platypus uses electronic impulses to detect underwater prey and locate objects in the darkest depths of the creeks and rivers they call home. They feed on insect larvae, freshwater shrimps, worms and yabbies, which they bring to the surface to eat.
Platypuses lay eggs. Despite being a mammal, platypuses lay eggs – making them a monotreme. They’re one of only five monotreme species left in existence.
They’re over-dressers. With two layers of fur – for insulation and waterproofing, platypuses use their fur to trap a layer of air next to their skin so they can remain buoyant and dry when they’re underwater, which they are a lot. The platypus spends about 12 hours every day underwater looking for food.
They’re mysterious. No one knows why, but when these small brown creatures are put under UV lights, they give off a biofluorescent green-blue glow. Which is strange, but even stranger are the people who keep putting them under UV lights.
Platypuses are cute, but their babies are even cuter. Which could be why the name for a baby platypus is a puggle. And a baby platypus who has one wizard parent and one human parent is a muggle puggle.
They’re even harder to spot now than they used to be. Prolonged droughts, bushfires, a changing climate and landclearing have impacted the platypuses' habitat and decreased their population. So, if we don’t want the modern platypus to go the same way as their seventy centimetre long ancestors, it’s more important than ever to work towards conservation and restoration of platypus and their habitat.
They're real! When platypuses were first discovered in 1798, British scientists thought they were a hoax created by putting parts of different animals together – webbed feet and a bill like a duck, a body like an otter and a tail like a beaver. But the joke was on them, the platypus is real and it is awesome!
Platypuses don’t have stomachs. Platypuses (platypodes and platypi are technically also correct, but much rarer in use) aren’t the only animals to forgo an acid-producing part of the gut; spiny echidnas, and nearly a quarter of living fishes all have a gullet that connects directly to their intestines.
Platypus bills give them a 'sixth sense'. A platypus’s bill has thousands of cells that give it a sort of sixth sense, allowing them to detect the electric fields generated by all living things. It’s so sensitive that the platypus can hunt with its eyes, ears, and nose all closed, relying entirely on the bill’s electrolocation.
Platypuses used to be giant. The ancient versions of a lot of modern animals, including penguins, were oversized monsters compared to the animals we know today. Platypuses are no different: In 2013, the discovery of a single tooth helped researchers identify a prehistoric platypus that was more than three feet long—double the size of the modern animal.
The platypus is a monotreme—which means “single hole” in Greek. Platypuses are one of only five species of extant monotremes—just them and four species of echidna—which split from the rest of the mammals 166 million years ago. These egg-laying mammals get their name from the hole that serves as both an anus and a urino-genital opening. In 2008, scientists deciphered the entire DNA of the duck-billed platypus and determined that, in accordance with the animal’s somewhat bizarre appearance, the platypus shared genes with reptiles, birds, and mammals.
Platypuses nurse without nipples. Although platypuses are born out of leathery eggs, the babies nurse from their mother. Female platypuses, however, don’t have nipples. Instead, their milk is released out of mammary gland ducts on their abdomen. The babies drink it up by sucking it out the folds of their mother's skin, or her fur.
Platypuses have retractable webbing. Although they can only stay submerged in water for a few minutes—they are mammals, after all—platypuses are much better suited to scooting around in water than they are on land. Much like an otter, they prune their thick coat to add air bubbles that act as insulation in the cool rivers where they hunt. Out on land, the platypus’s short limbs mean it has to exert 30 percent more energy than a similarly sized land-based mammal just to move around. All that said, they do have one particular adaptation to ease their terrestrial travel: The webbing between their front claws—a boon when paddling through streams—retracts when the platypus ambles up the riverbank to expose sharp claws.
Platypuses use gravel as makeshift teeth. Platypuses don’t have teeth inside their bill, which makes it difficult to chew some of their favorite foods—but they have worked out a pretty ingenious solution. Along with worms, insects, shellfish, and whatever else these bottom-feeders scoop up to make a meal out of, the platypus also picks up gravel from the riverbed. The platypus packs it all into pouches in his cheek to carry it up to the surface where it munches away, using the bits of gravel as makeshift teeth to break up tougher food.
Platypuses use their tails for all sorts of things. Unlike beavers, which have very visually similar tails, platypuses don’t use their tails to slap the water in warning, or even to move them through the water. Most of the time, the primary function of the platypus’s tail is just to store up to nearly half of the animal's body fat in case of a food shortage. A female platypus also uses her tail to hold incubating eggs against her warm body.
They’re protected by Australian law. If you’re lucky enough to see a platypus in the wild, leave it where it is. The animals are protected by law and “cannot be captured or killed, except for scientific research,” according to the Australian Museum. Doing so carries major penalties: One man who recently nabbed a wild platypus from a waterway in Queensland faces up to $289,000 in fines.